# exegesis - _stay tuned for more_

News is a ubiquitous aspect of the modern world, driven by the ease of access via the Internet to a wealth of recent and relevant information on close to any topic. With the advent and take up of the Internet, our society has become one of instant access and the potential of universal understanding of the events that shape our planet. The paradox of the contemporary experience of news, however, is that this is not the case.

This project seeks to explore this paradox through recontextualising news and information as a source of aesthetic and conceptual beauty. By divorcing the headline from the article and obscuring its meaning, "_stay tuned for more_" presents the headline in a wall of text, becoming both a commentary on and example of the information of which it seeks to elicit.

## Minimalism and the headline

The work is an example of minimalist electronic art, the complexity of the imagery displayed is driven not by conscious control of the artist, but rather, by the interactions of several computer programs which, when executed, create an ever changing - or perhaps more accurately ever "present" - wall of text, which serves to both highlight and obscure its source material&mdash;news headlines.

The headline, as an entity, is chosen as it too highlights and obscures the information contained in the article of which it heads. As a brief summation of the contents of the news piece, the headline represents a distillation of the information down to an informative sentence fragment, however it also obscures any nuance or detail that may inform the interpretation of the events described. When seen in this way, this project, and the headlines it sources, can be thought of as performing the same process on news information&mdash;to both highlight and obscure news.

## The nature of news

It is important then to consider what news is, or more importantly, what the concept of news is. As mentioned above, news can be thought of as the information which drives our understanding of the world around us and the events which shape our society. When considered in this way, "news" can be viewed as a conceptual object that exists in our collective consciousness. The system which drives the concept of news is thus not the physical system that produces and disseminates the information, but rather, the concept of news is our collective understanding of what the idea of news represents. By considering news as a virtual object, it follows that it does not exist physically, but rather in a conceptual space as an idea, a meme, an understanding of the act of understanding.

## The idea of information

This collective idea or meme is alluded to in Arjen Appadurai's essay in _Information is Alive_, published by V2_/NAi Publishers, "Archive and Aspiration". Appadurai suggests that in the humanist imagination, the archive - or information&mdash;is a tool for the collective psyche. Appadurai goes on to suggest that the Information Age has elevated the archive/information to an order of magnitude of importance above what it once had, as ease of access to archives such as the Internet is now ubiquitous and commonplace. In others words, as its users have grown, so has the archive (Appadurai, 2003).

From this basis, Appadurai argues that the collective understanding of the archive as an externalised, cultural memory is now at a point of intersection with the collective understanding of the internal psyche, such that our collective memory exists both as the ideas and concepts we share in our minds, and the ideas and concepts we have externalised into constructed systems such as the Internet (Appadurai, 2003). The idea that news is simultaneously the physical mechanisms to disseminate information and the cognitive mechanisms to understand it, is a key concept that has driven this investigation.

The physical mechanisms mentioned above are of particular importance to the systems in place which create the idea of news, as they allow an unprecedented understanding of news via the Internet, a commodity which is up to date, instant, and readily available.

This concept - that news has become an entity of the Internet - is explored by Douglas Ahlers in his 2006 _Press/Politics paper_, "News Consumption and the New Electronic Media". Ahlers suggests that the rise of the Internet and the growth of online news has caused the decline of traditional news media. Indeed he canvasses the idea that those involved in the news industry have reached a point where they, as of 2006, had begun to speculate that the future of news was indeed the Internet (Ahlers, 2006).

## The _newssphere_

This idea is of critical importance to "_stay tuned for more_", for the Internet provides both the content and contextual basis that drives it. The program&mdash;or more accurately one of the sub-programs&mdash;"scrapes" the Internet , pulling headlines out of the _newssphere_ and collating and consolidating them. In essence the program takes a subset of online news, and creates a microcosm of news headlines for the artwork to use. This generates a metaphysical object that the program references, using this gathered information, which alludes to a greater whole, that being, the concept of news. The writings of Ahlers serve as a point of reference for the evolution of both the idea of Appadurai's news as an archive&mdash;that being the information contained within the Internet&mdash;and the idea that from this archive, via the Internet, a greater understanding of the conceptual basis of news has formed in our collective psyche.

The idea that online news has surpassed or superseded tradition media, however, is challenged by Boczkowski and Mitchelstein's _New Media & Society paper_, "Online news consumption research: An assessment of past work and an agenda for the future". Boczkowski and Mitchelstein argue that despite the rapid growth of the online news ecosystem, it has not yet (as of 2010) displaced "traditional" media. The argument put forth by Boczkowski and Mitchelstein suggests that consumers will typically limit themselves to their previously known news sources, or news topics, valuing stability and familiarity (Boczkowski & Mitchelstein, 2010). This forms a critical nuance of the project, that being the aim to challenge the concept of the familiar&mdash;traditional media as discussed by Boczkowski and Mitchelstein&mdash;by reconceptualising the idea of news and recontexualising the content of the headline.

## Software and processes

Formally, this project is grounded in the ecosystem of software art. An intrinsic aspect of software art is its dual nature, being both a process (the output) and an object (the program). In his 2008 paper, _Software Art Aesthetics_, Andreas Broeckmann makes the claim that software art has come into its own in the past decade. Broeckmann draws attention to the ubiquitous nature of software in the modern world, and that the underlying nature of the software that powers our society and culture is typically hidden from view; not by choice but by indifference (Broeckmann, 2008).

Indeed, the understanding of the underlying processes that power the software that powers our society, as suggested by Broeckmann, is relegated to mystery. This lack of understanding, in part, drives the aesthetic beauty of software art, and draws back to the dichotomy that separates the program and the output. The coding aspect of some software art is the unseen one, the process that drives it, whereas the output, that which is given aesthetic beauty by the instruction of the artist/programmer, is the aspect that is considered to be the art object in the eye of the viewer. Conceptually, however, this is not the case. The art object, the output of the program, exists only in an intangible universe&mdash;the program only guides the computer to produce an output, and there is no physical point where one can attribute it status of an art object. The computer and the code itself are thus not the art object, they are simply instructions to create it.

By its very nature however, the concept of software art can be extended when considered under the idea of processor art. In his 2002 thesis, _Processor Art: Currents in the Process Oriented Works of Generative and Software Art_, Thor Magnusson raises a point which can be considered pivotal, if not crucial, to the nature of the project. Magnusson argues that software art can be reconsidered as _processor art_. In essence, his argument is that if an example of sortware art that is in flux, that is, changing from moment to moment as the program is executed, it follows that the art object exists only when the program that creates it is currently being processed by the computer (Magnusson, 2002). The art object in an example of processor art is not the program, nor is it the output. The output exists only as a sensory guide to the art object, which exists as a process on the computer, the potentiality of the instructions given to create it. The transient and intangible nature of processor art can thus be thought of as a manifestation of an idea. The art object exists simultaneously in the mind's eye of the viewer and the information universe as represented by the memory and processes of the computer.

## Recontextualising the headline

A key example of software that informed this investigation is that of Sawad Brooks' entry in the Whitney Museum's _CODeDOC_ exhibition, _"global city front page (for saskia sassen)"_. _global city_ is a simple program which takes the front page of three newspaper sites, and displays them layered atop one another, transforming the headlines, articles and images into a chaotic and overwhelming jumble. It is this idea of the overwhelming amount of information available that this project seeks to explore, presenting it in a similar fashion to that of _global city_ - the wall of text as was previously described. By recontextualising a medium typically given to the conveying of messages, global city creates a confusing, "noisy" object, where information is obscured by repetition and superimposition, bringing vitality to a static image while retaining its confusing nature.

This concept of vitality, is one that the project seeks to emulate. The essential aim of this investigation is to convey the idea that news&mdash;information&mdash;has a life of its own in the "newssphere" (for want of a better term), where its interactions and connections create a virtual space representing human knowledge. Maurizio Bolognini's seminal work, _"Programmed Machines"_, serves as a point of reference&mdash;the idea that software art exists in a conceptual form beyond its physicality. To this end, Bolognini writes:

> "I do not consider myself an artist who creates certain imagines, and I am not merely a conceptual artist. I am one whose machines have actually traced more lines than anyone else, covering boundless surfaces. I am not interested in the formal quality of the images produced by my installations by rather in their flow, their limitlessness in space and time, and the possibility of creating parallel universes of information made up of kilometres of images and infinite trajectories. My installations serve to generate out-of-control-infinities." (Bolognini, 2008)

Bolognini's work serves as the perfect example of the idea that _stay tuned for more_ seeks to convey. _Programmed Machines_ consists of a series of computers that have been programmed to create visual outcomes. However, the display ports of these computers have been sealed with wax, such that the visual outcomes produced are not&mdash;or cannot be&mdash;seen. Bolognini's machines manifest the idea of a conceptual universe of possibility, wherein there exists the potential for aesthetic beauty without translating it into a form in which it can be observed. Thus, the aesthetic beauty of _Programmed Machines_ is not visual, as it would be were the computers able to display the images they create, but conceptual. This idea of the intrinsic beauty of conceptual ideas is of key importance to this investigation.

## net.art and beyond

_"stay tuned for more"_ also exists in the realm of _Internet art_, in that the use of the Internet to source its material is essential to its operation. This obviously draws a parallel to the net.art movement of the 1990s. net.art claims a heritage from the Fluxus movement of the 1960s and 1970s, and is considered to have reached its peak in the late 1990s (Greene, 2004). A significant figure, or figures, in the net.art movement was the jodi.org collective, comprising of Joan Heemskerk and Dirk Paesmans. The works of Heemskerk and Paesmans are considered to be pivotal influences on the net.art movement, as their early adoption and artistic concurrent development with that of the Internet is considered to be, in the field of Internet art, a crucial point of reference that has been built upon by subsequent artists (Greene, 2004).

Under the banner of the jodi.org collective, Heemskerk and Paesmans created a number of Internet sites, serving as the medium of their experimentations.  One such site is titled _"000 TEXT"_. This particular site displays a chaotically colourful wall of text&mdash;or more accurately, a wall of symbols - which sought to reduce the tools with which we construct language and thought, symbols, to incomprehensible non-information.

Another such site of the jodi.org collective is _"%20 ..........^ ......... _____-__________________________"_. Like _000 TEXT_ this site displays a jarring, chaotic jumble of symbols, and served to highlight that while symbols can be used to convey thoughts, it is possible to decouple them from any rational basis and instead represent incomprehension - in the case of this website, this is a visual aesthetic which deconstructs the illusion of order and meaning in information.

This kind of deconstruction is not the aim of this investigation. Rather, the intention is obfuscation, whereby the text retains brief moments of clarity amongst the noise. An example of this is Jonathan Harris and Sepandar Kamvar's 2006 project, _We Feel Fine_, which scrapes the blogosphere of social media and pulls out posts that begin with "I feel...;" or "I am feeling...", which are then analysed and transformed into a visual outcome. Notably, once the project was complete, there are no further human actions made by the programmers, in essence it creates itself. Similarly, _stay tuned for more_ will evolve its own visual outcome based on unexpected interactions between the various programs that comprise it.

The source material for _stay tuned for more_ is the news headline, and the news headline is given primary importance in the construction of the visual aesthetic. A significant influence is the works of Jenny Holzer - specifically, the _PLEASE CHANGE BELIEFS_ website. _PLEASE CHANGE BELIEFS_ is an online version of Holzer's more famous Truisms, which highlights the aphorisms that have been developed in her other projects. News headlines, in this instance being sourced from the Internet, are intrinsically linked back to it in a way similar to that which Holzer's aphorisms on the _PLEASE CHANGE BELIEFS_ site are linked to her prior work with Truisms&mdash;each represents a subset of information which has been extracted from the greater whole.

## _stay tuned for more_

This project is founded up on the premises that news exists as a concept, rather than a concrete object; that an artwork can exist as part of a conceptual universe; and that the element of a work of software art which can be considered the art object may not necessarily be one which exists in the physical universe. The aim of this project is to further explore and express these ideas. This is managed by a combination of programs, the interaction between which forms the conceptual art object.

News headlines are taken by the first program and collated, creating a database of headlines which is then used by the other programs. This is done indiscriminately, simply drawing down the RSS feeds of major Australian news organisations such as the ABC or the Australian. This information creates the foundation upon which the artwork is built, and while important, it is merely part of the program, rather than a visual outcome, as in its initial form it can only be seen or processed as information&mdash;raw data, so to speak.

From this data, the visual manifestation of the artwork is generated. By taking the headline and recontextualising it as part of a chaotic wall of information, the artwork seeks to draw attention to the overwhelming nature of modern news. Put simply, there is so much of it that it cannot be reasonably consumed in its entirety.

This relates to a cluster of ideas around the way that news is generated. The concept of self-censorship, where news suppliers elect to only cover topics considered not to be particularly controversial, limiting their scope to one which is sanitised, to better represent their own viewpoint and political bent (Pew Research Center, 2000). The concept of self-selection in news takes this idea further, as in addition to self-censorship and avoidance of controversial topics, bias tends to emerge in any news organisation simply by way of the focus they take or do not take on particular issues and topics (Sigelman, 1973).

It is this sense of intrinsic bias that <i>stay tuned for more</i> seeks to highlight by indiscriminately sourcing its material from a range of news sources with discreet focuses on certain issues, ideally compensating for any such bias by offsetting it with sources representing the opposite bias. However this in and of itself will not entirely eliminate bias, it will merely reduce it from the bias of particular news organisation to the bias of Australian news organisations, a bias that stems from the geopolitical concerns of Australia and Australians, a reminder that a truly unbiased system is an unobtainable ideal.

Having obtained and collated the source material, the next program displays the aestheticised headlines. This is done primarily with open source tools to create a shifting wall of text, which updates itself in real time as the source gathering program downloads more recent headlines. Older text is eventually purged from the system, ensuring that only text from within a certain timeframe is displayed. This reinforces the idea of the immediacy of modern news, that any breaking story tends to only remain in focus for a relatively short period of time before it is replaced by more recent news. Yesterday's news, as it were, can be thought of as being no longer relevant, and thus, no longer necessary to be conveyed.

_stay tuned for more_ is intended to be a delivery system for flashes of clarity; the wall of text is used to create a aestheticised sense that the information conveyed is vast and overwhelming, and thus, when the text recedes such that an individual headline is clearly visible, it then disappears, giving it a sense of being transitory and intangible - akin to the fleeting currency of news which it seeks to emulate. The visual outcomes of the project are in a state of flux, evolving aesthetically as the project has developed, however a critical aspect that has remained throughout is the concept of self-construction.

Self-construction is taken to represent the state by which the computer program creates an image with aesthetic properties based upon instructions it has been given, leaving the authorship of the visual outcome with the computer. This is not to say that there is no direction from the artist, but rather, that the direction given by the artist is the parameters of the program in question, which then generates the visual outcome. This introduces a third category into which the project can be placed in in addition to software and processor art&mdash;generative art; that is, the set of conditions and rules given to the program by the artist serve to create an autonomous system which can be thought of, in essence, as one which the artwork creates itself (Galanter, 2006). In this way, the project comes full circle back to Minimalism, in that while the visual outcomes represent a complex and chaotic aesthetic, it is entirely driven by a comparatively simple program, one which is constructed as an example of Minimalism, in in both the artistic sense and that of program design. By eliminating as much extraneous instructions or visual outcomes as possible, _stay tuned for more_ serves to evoke a complex image from a simple source, a similar trait of the headline - that a complex idea can be evoked from a sentence fragment.

This initial impression can be informed or changed by a less cursory investigation&mdash;reading the article in addition to the headline - but the beauty of the headline is its ability to condense a complex news piece into a few simple words, conveying the tone and intent of the writer to allow an evaluation of the subsequent article is concerned with, without necessarily requiring a reading of the article. The project seeks to challenge this idea, albeit in reverse.
By extrapolating to a complex landscape of headlines&mdash;a _newsscape_ - through a simple program, this project seeks to highlight the headline as a necessary aspect of modern news. The headline is that which draws ones attention to the article below, and thus it can be seen as the starting point to a greater understanding of the world. The paradox of the headline is that it also serves as an attention filter, encouraging or discouraging the further reading of the article it heads.

In light of this, the ultimate aim of the project, that is, recontextualising the headline, creates a dichotomy between its meaning and its function. By stripping the function from the headline, it becomes a fleeting glimpse into the potential of a greater understanding. By obscuring the meaning of the headline, it becomes a moment of clarity in a chaotic world. In essence, the recontextualised headline represents in a microcosm the idea that there is more occurring in the world that any one individual could ever hope to understand.

---

- Ahlers, D. (2006, vol. 11, no. 1, winter). News Consumption and the Electronic Media. _Press/Politics_ , pp. 29-52.
- Appadurai, A. (2003). Archive and Aspiration. In J. Brouwer, & A. Mulder (Eds.), _Information is Alive_ (pp. 14-25). Rotterdam: V2_/NAi Publishers.
- Boczkowski, E., & Mitchelstein, P. (2010, no. 7, vol 12). Online news consumption research: An assessment of past work and an agenda for the future. _New Media & Society_ , pp. 1085-1102.
- Broeckmann, A. (2008). Software Art Aesthetics. In D. O. Lartigaud (Ed.), _Art orient&eacute; programmation_. Paris: Sorbonne University.
- Galanter, P. (2006, June). Generative and Rules-based Art. _Vague Terrain 03_.
- Greene, R. (2004). _Internet Art_. London: Thames & Hudson.
- Magnusson, T. (2002). _Processor Art: Currents in the Process Oriented Works of Generative and Software Art_. Retrieved November 1, 2012, from http://www.ixi-software.net/thor/pa_highres.pdf
- Pew Research Center. (2000). _Journalists Avoiding The News_. Washington DC: Pew Research Center for The People & The Press.
- Sigelman, L. (1973). Reporting the News: An Organizational Analysis. _American Journal of Sociology_, 79 (1), 132-151.

---

© 2012 Scout Quinn
